# Drosophila Cooperative
A python script to track and analyze the behavior of groups of Drosophila larvae.

For more information please refer to our work:

*M. Dombrovski, A. Kim, L. Poussard, A. Vaccari, S. Acton, E. Spillman, B. Condron, and Q. Yuan, “A Plastic Visual Pathway Regulates Cooperative Behavior in Drosophila Larvae,” Current Biology, Vol.29, No.11, pp.1866-1876, 3 Jun 2019. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2019.04.060*

**Summary:** Cooperative behavior emerges in biological systems through coordinated actions among individuals [1, 2]. Although widely observed across animal species, the cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying the establishment and maintenance of cooperative behaviors remain largely unknown [3]. To characterize the circuit mechanisms serving the needs of independent individuals and social groups, we investigated cooperative digging behavior in Drosophila larvae [4, 5, 6]. Although chemical and mechanical sensations are important for larval aggregation at specific sites [7, 8, 9], an individual larva’s ability to participate in a cooperative burrowing cluster relies on direct visual input as well as visual and social experience during development. In addition, vision modulates cluster dynamics by promoting coordinated movements between pairs of larvae [5]. To determine the specific pathways within the larval visual circuit underlying cooperative social clustering, we examined larval photoreceptors (PRs) and the downstream local interneurons (lOLPs) using anatomical and functional studies [10, 11]. Our results indicate that rhodopsin-6-expressing-PRs (Rh6-PRs) and lOLPs are required for both cooperative clustering and movement detection. Remarkably, visual deprivation and social isolation strongly impact the structural and functional connectivity between Rh6-PRs and lOLPs, while at the same time having no effect on the adjacent rhodopsin-5-expressing PRs (Rh5-PRs). Together, our findings demonstrate that a specific larval visual pathway involved in social interactions undergoes experience-dependent modifications during development, suggesting that plasticity in sensory circuits could act as the cellular substrate for social learning, a possible mechanism allowing an animal to integrate into a malleable social environment and engage in complex social behaviors.

**Keywords:** cooperative behavior, vision, movement detection, circuit connectivity, plasticity, social experience, synchronized behavior

*M. Dombrovski, L. Poussard, K. Moalem, L. Kmecova, N. Hogan, E. Schot, A. Vaccari, S. Acton, and B. Condron, “Cooperative behavior emerges amongst Drosophila larvae,” Current Biology, Vol.27, No.18, pp. 2821-2826, 14 Sep 2017. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2017.07.054*

**Summary:** Spectacular examples of cooperative behavior emerge among a variety of animals and may serve critical roles in fitness [1, 2]. However, the rules governing such behavior have been difficult to elucidate [2]. Drosophila larvae are known to socially aggregate [3, 4] and use vision, mechanosensation, and gustation to recognize each other [5–8]. We describe here a model experimental system of cooperative behavior involving Drosophila larvae. While foraging in liquid food, larvae are observed to align themselves and coordinate their movements in order to drag a common air cavity and dig deeper. Large-scale cooperation is required to maintain contiguous air contact across the posterior breathing spiracles. On the basis of a directed genetic screen we find that vision plays a key role in cluster dynamics. Our experiments show that blind larvae form fewer clusters and dig less efficiently than wild-type and that socially isolated larvae behave as if they were blind. Furthermore, we observed that blind and socially isolated larvae do not integrate effectively into wild-type clusters. Behavioral data indicate that vision and social experience are required to coordinate precise movements between pairs of larvae, therefore increasing the degree of cooperativity within a cluster. Hence, we hypothesize that vision and social experience allow Drosophila larvae to assemble cooperative digging groups leading to more effective feeding and potential evasion of predators. Most importantly, these results indicate that control over membership of such a cooperative group can be regulated.

**Keywords:** Drosophila; vision; cooperation; behavior; learning
